
# radsafer (version 2.1.0)

***2019-12-17*** Many improvements in rad measurements family plots. Bug
corrections in mcnp tools family, especially mcnp\_si\_sp\_hist, plus
split off of copy and paste version as mcnp\_si\_sp\_hist\_scan. New
function in radionuclides family - RN\_find\_parents - to find out where
a radionuclide may have decayed from. A vignette for overview of the
package is added.

# radsafer (version 2.0.1)

***2019-05-27*** This version is to be submitted to CRAN. Bug removal on
dk\_activity. Updated examples in many functions to identify parameters
at least once.

# radsafer (version 2.0.0.9000)

***2019-05-23*** Repaired a bug in dk\_activity. Working on improvements
in overall ease of use. Expecting an update to CRAN in a couple of
weeks.

# radsafer (version 2.0.0)

***2019-05-05*** Hurray\! This is the grand opening of radsafer\! The
ICRP 107 data in RadData is now effectively utilized for radionuclide
screening, plots, and use with MCNP. MCNP utilities have been expanded -
see the Readme file for details.

# radsafer (version 1.0.9000)

***2019-04-21***

New functions have been added to the development version, 1.0.0.9000.
Several of the existing functions have had slight changes, including
name changes that will help make the package easier to use going
forward.

# radsafer (version 1.0.0)

***2019-04-06***

Big news\! **radsafer** is now available from CRAN\! So, we should be
announcing the grand opening, right?

But wait. **RadData** (<https://github.com/markhogue/RadData>) has also
just been issued by CRAN. So, this is the soft opening for just a few
close friends because a much more compelling version of **radsafer**
will be out soon. It is going to have some really helpful functions for
accessing, screening, plotting, and making inputs from **RadData**.

Here’s the backstory of **radsafer** and **RadData**. Here at radsafer
world headquarters, we were all excited when we figured out what we
could do with access to the ICRP 107 Nuclear Decay Data for Dosimetric
Calculations. So excited, we wanted to share it, along with a bunch of
other generally helpful health physics functions. But then, we found we
couldn’t meet CRAN’s size limit of 5 MB with all that data. Then, we had
other issues to deal with and were not sure if **RadData** would ever
get off the ground. So, we pursued, in parallel, issuing a lighter
**radsafer** and **RadData**. And now, suddenly, success has arrived at
the same time on both projects\! We’re so psyched\!

So, stay tuned, friends. **radsafer** will be out with version 1.1.0
probably around early May 2019. Then we’ll announce it to all the world.
